# Ideas

## On anatomy

There is a clear connection present between the anatomical structures. Such a connection is to be better elucidated by neuroembryology. It is clear that motor and sensory nuclei are positioned relatively similarly from the spinal cord to the thalamus, in accordance to position of the body parts to which the information pertains; however, positions are inverted in the cortex. This does imply that there must have been some kind of inversion in the formation of the telencephalon cortical region.

So far it is clear motor and sensory functions are relatively straightforward and, since the telencephalon came from the neural tube, there must be an explanation for its deviation of function – processing function. Such is the same for all cortical regions or regions whose functions are merely not motor or sensorial. Perhaps not.

## On asymmetry

Cortical asymmetry described in literature:

Hemispheric specialization for a given cognitive function most likely reflects differences in the neural circuits of each hemisphere and correlates with asymmetry in grey and white matter of the left and right side of the brain. Two well-documented neuroanatomical asymmetries are found in the human cortex and overlap with regions involved in language: the planum temporale (PT), an area of the brain that lies just posterior to the auditory cortex in the temporal lobe, displays, in 65% of adult brains, a greater grey matter volume on the left side; the perisylvian fissure (PF), one of the most prominent fissures that divides the frontal and parietal lobes on each side of the brain, is significantly longer in the left hemisphere than in the right hemisphere. Another structural asymmetry has been described in frontal and occipital cortical protrusions: This asymmetry, called cerebral petalia, consists of a greater protrusion of the surface of one hemisphere beyond that of the opposite hemisphere, usually the extension of the right frontal lobe beyond the left on the anterior side of the brain and the left occipital lobe beyond the right on the posterior side; however, the functional relevance of petalia asymmetry remains unclear (Duboc et al., 2015).

## On potentiation as the neural basis of learning

Let’s start with a hypothesis: Short-term potentiation is responsible for short-term memory; Long-term potentiation is responsible for long-term memory; The hippocampus is the gateway which chooses if a short-term memory should become long-term. If this is so, then the modulation of all our declarative experience (non-motor) is solely dependent on potentiation. Is this the consistent with reality? It certainly is consistent with the observations made of the H.M patient. However, what then is the purpose of LTD? One could say that it is responsible for the forgetting of long-term memories. If this is the case, then surely H. M’s memory could only deteriorate… Or rather no, long-term memories encoded in the cortex can suffer LTP, when they are re-activates by some experience which brings it forth from the depths of experience and memory. This is a hypothesis which can be refuted or not. I will check the facts and see how they fit with this paradigm. This hypothesis, however, assumes that plasticity phenomena is predetermined genetically, i.e. that each circuit has its own parameters for choosing an input to either result in potentiation or depression. Is this what happens in disorders associated with cognitive gain of function?

## On the Neural Basis of Knowledge

It is not known whether memories are stored in groups of neurons or in the synapses themselves (these are the plausible options). This question was first asked by appealing to the concept of an engram – a theoretical memory trace encoded in the brain. There seem to be two main mechanisms involved in learning – neurogenesis and synaptic plasticity. Neurogenesis consists in the formation of new neurons by way of migration of precursor cells, until their maturated forms incorporate some circuit. Synaptic plasticity is a phenomenon of various timeframes which accounts for changes in the pre- and post- synaptic neuron, leading to either a bigger or smaller synaptic potential. Learning presupposes the existence of mechanisms which allow for change of circuits. Both of the prior mentioned mechanisms allow, in theory, for learning; however, synaptic plasticity seems to be more flexible in that it requires less resources and acts much quickly. Since synapses are a thousand times more numerous (number was given in a class), synaptic plasticity can also modulate finer information. In contrast, neurogenesis is limited in the adult brain, with few existing niches. Furthermore, neurogenesis is known to not occur in dolphins and some bats and might also not be of considerable importance in the adult human brain, although it seems to be ubiquitous in the “lower” animals. Could it be that synaptic plasticity evolved as to overtake neurogenesis? Neurogenesis seems to be most useful in cases of neural loss, in which neurons are missing to complete a circuit. Either way, it might be that such a neuron loss could be compensated by further synaptic connections. Couldn’t this be happening in those cases in which some major cognitive function is represented in other healthy brain areas?

## On Neurotransmitters and Neuromodulators

Why is it that there are so many different neurotransmitters? Even though different transmitters act on different receptors, there seems to be some redundancy. It is true that type I mGluR increase intracellular calcium such as the α1 adrenergic receptors. What then is the difference? One must assume our biology is highly optimized to its environment and that it is very efficient; furthermore, more neurotransmitters allow for more information and finer control of it. If there is more information, there are more pathways of information flow which can be subjected to finer control and modulation, in this case done by the neuromodulators. Then, it could be that the redundancy of neurotransmitters is a result of modulation. This could be corroborated if each neurotransmitter were found to have a specific modulation pathway which allowed for finer control of neurotransmitter release and consequent cell response.

## On Language

Not only should I try to ask relevant questions, but also propose ways to answer them. What is the medium of my scientific thought? Language. What is language? I define it as a cognition used by humans which consists in a mapping of experiences to symbols, capable of being expressed in sound. Language is capable of talking about itself! What is the purpose of language? To aid a social species in its survival by allowing for a faster way of transmitting information. What is written language? A mapping from sound symbols to physical symbols. What is the purpose of written language? It preserves information for longer. It brings stability compared to oral language.

After this preliminary introduction to language, it is clear that language is limited by experience. No subjective experience means language cannot exist. It is also true that language cannot explain our subjective experience; try to describe the color red or what being in love feels like. Each emotion represented in language brings forth the associated emotion upon the hearer. However, such mechanism allows for error and non-conformity of thought between the speaker and hearer – a mismatch of ideas, miscommunication. More complex definitions of a word therefore have the purpose of diminishing this error by calling upon more specific ideas. If someone is describing a dog and you want to know of what breed it is, the speaker will try to describe him more fully. This allows for a more specific recalling of the hearer to the supposed correct experience, which might or not be encoded in the hearer. For example, the speaker could be explaining a breed of dog which you have never seen before and, in this case, it is futile to give a more complex description; the best the hearer can do is try to imagine, which most likely won’t resemble the real faithfully.

There is nothing absurd in this hypothesis but now comes the question of “how does the brain do this?”. Or even harder “how can you prove this?” - this is the scientist asking. I will take this hypothesis for granted – it conforms with common sense; all I am saying is that language is simply a social tool, one unique to Man in its inner workings, but general in nature as an abstract tool of information sharing. It is a tool present in all healthy human beings although it requires input throughout childhood. This means that a socially isolated child would not be capable of developing language; this is already implicit in some way in the definition of language, namely that it is a social tool, and it is also implicit in the relationship of language to our experience, that it is a limitation of it; since it is so, language would be obsolete, in a non-social environment, for our phenomenological experience would be our only tool of use. Lastly, language serves also to conjure up mental images, and in this way, it actively affects our experience of the world – this greatly supports the view that language is subservient to experience, it maps experiences, but it cannot create them. Tell me “Yuba” is a word which represents for a color I cannot perceive, but which can be perceived by a community of people; even if I live among them, I will not acquire a perception of that color. Further, it is also true that language is highly malleable, flexible and evolves, as seen by the various languages that exist. Contrarily, it is also true that language has a core which cannot be changed; its function cannot change and it has to have laws, be consistent and not irregular. In other words, it must have a stable medium for the success of its function.

What I hope to show is that there is much more diversity of languages which one might expect at first sight. Besides the hundreds of languages spoken or otherwise in the world, within each language there are many more languages. With this I mean that there are as many languages as individual human beings. The competence of an individual for language is dependent on experience, and since the latter is fundamentally unique, so is the meaning which is represented within the words. Surely, because language is efficient, there is a strong claim to the similarity of experiences between human beings – something which cannot be proven. This insight implies that the closer individuals are in time and space, the more overlap there is between their languages. It should also be noticed that confusion and err arises simply because there is no absolute conformity between languages and science, a field who praises its objectivity, is nonetheless still filled with this problem. Now, since we know that primitive languages must have accounted for basic situations in the world, for that is the purpose of language, we have a starting point. If we also acquire insight into how language can develop, then we have a beginning and a way forward. It would surely explain the nature of language.

Starting this essay on the 4 fundamental questions of linguistics proposed by Noam Chomsky, which divided the subject in linguistics in itself, developmental linguistics, psycholinguistics and neurolinguistics, the first question is the most fundamental one. We must first perceive language to talk about it or understand it better. We know its function and we can describe its syntax, morphology, phonology and meaning. The first 3 properties relate to the medium of language, while meaning relates to function. The second question concerns how language can evolve; I have addressed this previously. The third question concerns how language can be produced and understood. And the fourth question asks about the neural basis of language and its neurological components in health and pathology. One can see already that the third and fourth questions cannot be one due to the mind-body problem and the separation of psychology with neuroscience. Ultimately, we would like to transform these last two questions into one.

We must work with what we know. I do not know how electrical signalling converts into experience because I experience these same electrical signals; as so, they make part of my experience and not of a presupposed real reality. Working with what we have, we try to explain phenomena. In the case of trying to explain our experience itself, we presume it is due to the activation of certain neurons which are responsible; rather, it is the whole state of the brain responsible for our experience, which can be described in a matrix having values of either 0 or 1, according to the activation state of each neuron. There is a problem though, in fact, how can we stop time and check the state of each neuron? Activation is done by action potentials, but action potentials take time to propagate; therefore, analysis of brain activity must only make sense within a time period. Perhaps this time period is the minimal time it takes for a neuron to propagate an action potential. Only then could one see if that neuron is activated. This is granting we can even measure the membrane potential of all neurons of the brain. Such needed resolution is unreachable nowadays. Functional MRI measures blood flow which correlates crudely with areas of brain tissue and it is, therefore, of low resolution. Besides these difficulties, we must, with our present knowledge, assume that it is neuronal activity which determines our experience and this can best be represented in a matrix. Another question is if values of a neuron should be analog or digital. It seems to me that an input matrix could be construed based on the probabilities that a particular neuron will have a change of membrane potential enough to induce an action potential. Such a matrix would be extremely complicated because it would depend on distances of the some to the locality of the synaptic potential, the activation states of connecting neurons, temporality of firing neurons and the computation of all these factors.

Of great value to the neurolinguistics subject are the pathologies/lesions which impair language, i.e. they lead to 0’s in certain regions. Either gain-of-function or loss-of-function situations lead to some kind of knowledge about language. It is the function of the neuroscientist to create a plausible framework which explain language in concordance with the facts. Afterwards, we predict with our framework and then test through experiments. I have given already definitions of language which I take to be true (precisely because I defined certain concepts that way), and now I must create experiments which either confirm or not the predictions of the system. These come about to answer any question we might have about language but with a twist… The questions must be translated into my own system. The concepts utilized in my questions must be already defined and must be understood the way the system describes it.

The question: What is the neural basis of spoken language? To answer this, we would use our limited resources to find out what areas are destroyed in cases of loss-of-function, by analysing certain pathologies; we could also analyse instances of gain-of-function, with the same principle. This a fairly straightforward approach whose limits depends on the methods of brain imaging, to assess neuronal activity and to clarify what areas are affected by its maximum spatial and temporal resolution.

The question of how humans acquire language is more interesting. This time we cannot use any subject, but only babies. We could also imagine a broader question, such as, how does the brain acquire competence for cognitions, which would give us more methods of approaching such a question and get a more general insight into the brain.

## On metacognition/metaconsciousness and hypnosis

It seems that I have the ability to be aware of my awareness. It is this awareness itself that drives the human need to know more about the inner workings of its own perception. An example will better elucidate the consequences of such meta-awareness: Assuming I’m a human from the future; my civilization has ways of rapidly administering pharmaceuticals which modulate several brain areas and associated circuits. However, emotions are still present and I still get angry, jealous, etc… At such a moment, I’m aware of my own emotions, i.e. I present mindfulness of my own experience and can analyse it rationally. I know that emotions lead to erratic actions which can be denigrating for me, but since I have pharmaceuticals which can inhibit my emotions, I can control it. This is what goes on in my brain as thought: “I am raging and angry… I will commit a crime… This cannot happen because I will go to jail if I commit such an act…Better take anti-rage drugs and go my own way.” This thought seems to override my instincts and it is rational, it acts by rational beliefs encoded in the brain. Such a thought process belongs to a class of metacognition type of thoughts. Although I gave a futuristic example to better elucidate my point, it should be noted that ethical philosophies, such as stoicism, and mindfulness techniques, such as meditation, have the same end goal.

Interestingly, hypnosis seems to be the complete opposite of metacognition and it is necessary that a reduction of consciousness and mindfulness, occurs such that our own acts become unconscious to us and controlled by external suggestions (Simione et al., 2022).

It would be insightful to understand the differences in brain activity between these states. Furthermore, both mindfulness and hypnosis might be extremes of thought processes selected by evolution to better allow survival of the social animal; namely, these are rationality or caution, e.g. in not murdering someone who was wronged us, and submissiveness or servitude, e.g. in serving a tyrannical leader. It can be argued that metacognition is the supreme of science while hypnosis is the infinitesimal of religion; both famous instances of collective cognitive imperative. In truth, both extremes, as I have already alluded to, are simply thoughts, i.e. brain activity which encodes beliefs. I will try to explain it better by way of examples. The first kind of thought has, usually, as its subject the inner reflexion of the individual while the second kind of thoughts has, usually, as its subject metaphysical beliefs. Since the latter are not are not correspondent with reality, it is often necessary there is a strengthening of such a belief, be it by social pressure or external persuasion. One might argue that my belief that love is an emotion present for the sole purpose of reproduction is a belief acquired by social pressure, namely that of the scientific enterprise, and so that it constitutes a metaphysical belief and can be said it is of hypnotic nature. This is a great counter-argument for the epistemological value of the scientific belief of love and the belief that I can communicate with God, for example, depend on other set of beliefs which themselves cannot be called true; however, in mindfulness, I dismiss my experience of love and its value by the presence of this scientific belief, which is to say that my belief is a response to some inner experience borne out of introspection, while in hypnotism or servitude of thought I simply accept a thought, usually from external origin, as true and act based on it. I will give one more example to better elucidate this teleological difference in definitions. I experience fear that there is a monster hidden in my house, because the latter resembles a haunted house and I live alone in it. This unlikely belief causes me to act in certain ways, like closing every door and running through the hall. In acting like this, I am being a servant of my thought and instigating further each time I behave like this. This I will call primal actions because I’m under effect of beliefs without critical analysis of them. To understand this belief is, most likely, wrong, and acting fearlessly afterwards, is a result of mindfulness. The difference is then the awareness and rational criticizing of such a belief, whatever may be the beliefs which constitute rational thinking. Perhaps the concepts of Julian Jayne can help me here; a state of metaconsciousness is a state where the analog “I” is present and is the subject of thought; the state of subconsciousness or hypnosis is a state in which there is no analog “I”.

## On brain computational models

The brain is a physical object. It is limited in size but is responsible for everything we experience. It is baffling that such a tiny physical object be able to compute so many things, i.e. hold so much information. Insight is probably on the fact that the genome, which necessarily holds all the information to create a viable human brain, does it by encoding only information about the basic framework of the brain which allows it then to be filled up with information from the real world. Granted, this refined and compact information came about only after millions and millions of years but we get it ready made for us; we just need to find where it is – not just locally but also temporally, which makes it much harder. Somehow, a faithful computational model must be able to allow the evolution of the system based on the input it gets, while the system itself already presupposes the input itself.

## On the increase of human power

An isomorphism between some non-experienceable stimulus and some perception could, in theory, become a reality. For example, priming the CO2 concentration in the atmosphere to some tingling sensation. This would only be desirable in a case in which the awareness of some piece of information would prove advantageous. If we perceive some stimulus in a certain way, it surely is for our advantage, in relation to the external world we live in, as required by natural selection. However, in the case of dominance and in this era of reason and science, it is possible to increase our power to meet the needs of our specialized times. For example, in this era it is possible to kill with biochemical weapons, to which our senses are not sensible to; in this case, it would be worthwhile to have an apparatus, possibly in some way connected to the brain, which could provide such information.

Research idea: To create a nerve cell which is sensitive only to some range of stimuli, such as UV or Infrared, and connect it to a nervous cell organoid or perhaps even a transgenic animal model, which can build models with that information. We could then see if there is a recognition of it. Since UV is cell damaging, we could use infrared. We could create a mouse model with neurons which expresses an IR-sensitive protein which results in an action potential, by being coupled to a depolarizing receptor. Interestingly, the use of animal models would provide the advantage of generational studies, in which there could be some kind of evolution in the use of these specialized neurons. Perhaps, C. _elegans_ or fruit flies could be used for this kind of studies. Continuing with this theoretic study, an environment could be created in which higher IR light rays corresponds with more food. One would expect adaptation to this environment.