# Introduction

It might be impossible to get a full understanding of the brain. After all, the knowledge we can obtain is itself a product of our brain (axiom). The neuron we see through the Golgi’s staining technique is bound to the way we see the world. If this conforms to reality, which we presume it exists – namely because we attribute a cause to everything and so reality is the cause of our experience – independently of experience, we cannot know. Inquiry about the brain must be based on what we can perceive. Even if we use marks which represent some brain phenomena, nonetheless we are using experience.

I shall advance not knowing what I can know. First, I need to pose some basic questions. I believe it is necessary to ask the crucial questions and, most crucially, understand them. Now that my general goal and general method is explicit, I need to also start narrowing the goal. In what way will I increase my degree of power? I will let my brain wander first, as an example. I would very much like to transport myself really fast from one place to another. Well, at first sight this seems more like a physics problem; however, this problem can be approached in several ways: (1) I can simply be unconscious of the ride until the desired place. This has some problems since action would take place while I would be unconscious (presupposition of reality), and so it could not really be called fast transportation. I will give an example: Imagining I want to go to another country. It will be a drag to be conscious of the waiting until I get there. It would be much better if I could somehow focus on something else, while my brain automates the actions necessary for the ride, like finding my own flight, etc... Certainly, I would much rather escape to a dream world than be bored in the “real” one. Even if I could not automate my brain to do such tasks, couldn’t I choose to go back to consciousness at required moments? Such as when driving a car on a common pathway, and we begin daydreaming, being called to attention by approaching some car. To answer this question, requires understanding the capability of one’s own mind. (2) I find a more practical way of transportation. Would it also not be favourable to fly to one’s own destination? How much better would it be to be a mind-controlled device of flight? It could be compared to the intuitive task of walking, except in this case energy would be coming from an external source, and so our lives would be much easier. (3) Actual transportation. The destruction of one’s own body for the creation of another identical one. While this one is the most far-fetched option, would not the knowledge of the “self” contribute crucially to the understanding of such an idea?

This simple example is simply one of many other dreams I might have, and others as well. Using our intuition to act more, and be less prone to being affected. Spinoza got it right; we have to make of nature what we can do of it. Like nature, we shall try to intuit that which does not need consciousness and use consciousness to intuit more.

Essentially, the former laid out ideas take advantage of some feature of our mind; but what if one simply tries to make the brain more efficient in its fundamental purpose? The brain’s purpose is simply to gather information, process it and command information. The speed of this process is limited, however, by the medium by which the signal propagated, i.e., the nature of the signal itself. Granted, this speed is much faster than the normal speed of propagation associated with, for example, the passage of information from a physical movement, like using our hands to type on our computer to know what kind of books are for sale. Additionally, it is also much slower than the speed of light. It is obvious we know of faster ways of propagating information and also that we are biologically stuck to our neuronal propagation of information. It is thus that if we wish to combine our intuition (in the Kantian sense of the word) of the world with a faster way of propagating information, it is necessary there be a transition between both medium, i.e., a signal transduction. This is essentially what happens with our chemical senses and wave senses. Taking vision as an example, waves are transformed into action potentials, but what we want to do is transform action potentials into waves, which travel much faster.