# Preface

The masters’ program I am undertaking is the beginning of a new journey. I hope it will give me an overview of the current state of neuroscience research, and with it, to understand better our experience. With what goal in mind? I know the limits of rationality. Actually, I know they must exist but not its extent. Within the scientific frame, with all its presuppositions and methods, I hope to act as to increase the power of acting of the human mind. I am my experience, and so, of course, I seek to increase my power of acting – to be freer.

I’m a finite being capable of a finite amount of power. I need the contribution of fellow minds so that I myself can progress. This is the knowledge that I seek to get throughout these 2 years. If this knowledge proves useful in my mind, it will also contribute to making the extent of rationality more conspicuous.

We have distinguishable sensations, that is, information. In a scientific realm of ideas, i.e. paradigm, sensations represent real structures. The former was selected through evolution to allow for existence. And since evolution did it, why can’t humans, through experience and reason, also create an extended phenotype? Granted, like it has been argued, computing more information might not be advantageous in all cases but, we humans, live a comfortable life in which our existence is at stake only minimally. We do have the ability for exponential growth in understanding the world. In a more surmise way, I hope to increase practicability in my life while understanding the limits of truth.

I shall not be dedicated wholly to this enterprise. Philosophy is even more important. While we can achieve a higher degree of power, there is a limit to it. Intrinsically, we must conform to existence – it is a prerequisite of experience. Philosophy helps one cope with that fact; besides many other insights it can offer into the world; philosophical literature, specially, being a crucial form of companionship.

I will analyse each information critically. Each claim must be scrutinized for its implications. I will start from the beginning; observation is the primordial way of obtaining information. I will first stay away from any scientific framework. I am a child learning for the first time. Afterwards, more ingenious ways of observation have to be employed. Only then can I start hypothesizing, that is, inquiring about that which is not intuitive. Intuition must give way to rationality if we are to increase our degree of power. Of course, our phenomenological experience depends on both, which are inseparable.

After trying to get more information about the brain, I will use it and manipulate to my own advantages. To understand the brain is to understand perception, which is to understand experience. If we can change our experience, for the better, like evolution supposedly has, with the appearance of cognitive tools such as language, then we shall live better and understand better.